Fingerprint web server: doing a request through Burp shows us that a server name and the language is returned.

Review Webpage Content for Information Leakage: there are no metadata files or anything personal on the website.

Identify application entry points: There are no entry points, the website came with an SQL script, but it probably would not remain in the same directory on an actual running website.

Test File Extensions Handling for Sensitive Information: Able to access any file extension.

Review Old Backup and Unreferenced Files for Sensitive Information: the project was downloaded from GitHub, it did not come with any backups.

Enumerate Infrastructure and Application Admin Interfaces: There are no admin functionalities on the site.

Test Role Definitions: only user role available.

HTTP methods: the server seems to accept all HTTP requests (GET/POST/PUT/DELETE).

Testing for Credentials Transported over an Encrypted Channel: the credentials are being passed in plain text in the requests and they are also saved in plain text in the database.

Testing for Weak Password Policy: the policy requires 8 characters for a password, but that requirement can be technically bypassed if we change the password from the password change page.

Testing Directory Traversal File Include: tried navigating to files outside the website's current directory (.../.../install.txt) and the server is giving a permission error in return.

Testing for Bypassing Authorization Schema: the browser checks if the email is a valid email, but if sending the request through Burp the check no longer happens as the check is client-side.

Testing for Session Management Schema: changing the session cookie when logged in seems to not have any effect, can still place orders even if the session cookie is changed; deleting the session cookie logs the user out.

Testing for Logout Functionality: The session cookie does not change if logged in or out, it does not reset; deleting the cookie does log you out.

Testing for Reflected Cross Site Scripting: we can make an account with an email such as "<script>alert();</script>" and log in by modifying the email input to type text; the script will execute on all pages when logged in.

You can place an empty order by making one of the order items have a letter instead of a digit even though you’re not supposed to be able to place empty orders.

Testing for SQL injection:
- `'); UPDATE user SET password=123 WHERE email='e@e.ee'--`
- `'); delete from user WHERE email='e@e.ee');--`
- `','$email','$pw','$cpw');--`
